Abstract.

The paper aims to cast light on the kind of proof involved in central transcen-
dental arguments. It is suggested that some of the difficulty associated with
such arguments may result from the tendency to construe them simply as artic-
ulating relations between concepts or propositional contents. A different
construal, connected with phenomenological description, is outlined, as a way
of bringing out the force of these arguments. It is suggested that it can be fruit-
ful to think in terms of this construal in understanding some of Kant’s tran-
scendental proofs. The recommended construal also helps to understand the
nature of the link between transcendental arguments and transcendental
idealism.

The concern in what follows is with what we should understand transcen-
dental arguments to be. At issue is the

kind

 of proof that is involved in
central transcendental arguments. I do not mean to suggest that only one
answer to the question should be possible, or that for any answer to count
as adequate it should fit everything that might reasonably be identified as a
transcendental argument. Transcendental arguments have been around for
too long to expect anything quite so tidy. The aim is rather to identify an
answer that fits core transcendental arguments: the sort of answer that
might have constituted a neater fit had the notion of a transcendental argu-
meant not enjoyed such a long and unfocussed history since Kant.

Part 1: The Conceptual Construal of Transcendental Arguments.

There is common agreement, at least in general terms, about what
transcendental arguments purport to do: they start from premisses that
are so rudimentary and indisputable that the interlocutor, and specifically
the sceptic, cannot fail to accept them, then by a series of valid moves
they yield a conclusion that is precisely of the sort that the sceptic did question. Thus the sceptic must concede that the sceptical possibility turns
out to be incompatible with other commitments that the sceptic cannot
but hold.
How transcendental arguments do this is less clear. A thumbnail sketch
might tell us that they reveal presuppositional relations. Many of those who
talk about presuppositions here also talk of necessary conditions. The ques-
tion is, what is meant by ‘a necessary condition’, or ‘presupposition’, the use
of which is so common in discussions of Kant’s transcendental progress in
particular?
Frequently, these relations are thought to hold between concepts, or prop-
ositions. To some extent this construal may derive from some of Kant’s own
formulations. Because of his transcendental idealism, he allows himself to
use terms like ‘representation’ (
Vorstellung
) in two ways,

 and insensitivity
to this can make it seem that Kant is talking only of presuppositions between
empirical representations; specifically, between an individual’s proposi-
tional contents. The tendency towards seeing transcendental arguments as
concerned with relations between broadly linguistic representations was
further encouraged in the not too distant past by the linguistic turn and –
more specifically – by the predominance of conceptual schemes.

 There are
various problems with this. But for present purposes the significant draw-
back to concentration on conceptual schemes in approaching transcendental
arguments is that it reinforces the view that transcendental arguments are
concerned with

conceptual structures

, hived off from objects of experience,
rather than with the

experienced objects

 themselves (however conceptual
that experience might be). There has thus been a fairly ubiquitous trend to
construe transcendental arguments as involving relations of presupposition
specifically of a conceptual nature.

I hope to bring out that the retreat from experienced objects to concepts
in fact results in missing the key to understanding transcendental argu-
ments.

 Indeed, the idea is that once their nature is properly grasped, the
modern practice of referring to them as transcendental

arguments

 might be
thought to be misleading.

Part 2: The Problem.

We ought to be clear about the tension between the two explanations –
roughly, of

what

 transcendental arguments do, and of

how

 they do it – that
emerges if the relation of presupposition or necessary condition in play is
understood in terms of

logical entailment

 or

deductive inference

. Such
construals cannot capture the kind of genuine increase in knowledge
claimed to be involved in transcendental arguments. Unless the sceptic is of
no interest whatsoever, the conclusion of the transcendental argument is a
substantial statement, one that says more than the premiss(es): the move
from premisses to conclusion is, we might say,

synthetic

. But a deductive

inference from premisses to conclusion could not in itself be responsible
for the addition of substantive content along the way. Making implicit logi-
cal entailment explicit may, to put it in Kant’s terms, increase our explica-
tive knowledge, but we are looking for expansive or ampliative
knowledge.

 There must then be some point at which the process of simple
deductive inference is disrupted, and a synthetic or ampliative move is
made.
This ampliative step could be presented either as a move from one line of
the argument to the next, or as a move of hypothetical form internal to a
given line. We can take these as notational variants for one and the same
move. For simplicity, I will stick to the latter form in what follows.
The tension arises when we ask how the truth of the proposition express-
ing the ampliative move is established. It would seem

prima facie

 that it
cannot be established empirically (a posteriori). The starting propositions of
effective transcendental arguments are certainly contingent – for example,
that I have different experiences, that I experience change, or that I am self-
conscious. These are clearly contingent and empirically established, but
they are so basic that they cannot be reasonably denied. The question is,
what is the nature of the less obvious moves that come later, en route to the
substantive conclusion? If a proposition expressive of such a move is to be
genuinely informative or expansive in relation to the premisses, then its
truth must be established in some way other than by logical entailment from
preceding steps. But if it is merely an empirically verified statement, it is not
clear how it would be immune from doubt. What transcendental arguments
require of such propositions is that they be

genuinely informative

, and yet
not be

contingent

.
The question is, then, what kind of truths comprise these central steps in
a transcendental argument, given that they cannot be based either on mean-
ings alone or on contingent observation. This question is just Kant’s guiding
question about how synthetic a priori judgements are possible. It is clear
that whatever else they do, transcendental arguments are supposed to
deliver just such knowledge.

Part 3: The General Shape of Transcendental Arguments.

This is the point that we have reached: it would seem that in every successful
transcendental argument there must be at least one genuinely ampliative or
synthetic step, which given its significance cannot simply be assumed (on
pain of the argument being question-begging against the sceptic), and which
– since it says more than any of the given premisses – cannot be established
deductively in the course of the argument. Yet it must be established a priori
if it is to be assured immunity to doubt.
Let one line expressive of such a step be the move from

q

 to

r

 in the
following schema. Where

p

 is a premiss the sceptic cannot fail to accept, and

s

 is a prop-
osition the sceptic typically doubts. For simplicity the schema depicts
the transcendental argument as an extended

modus ponens

 argument
form, but obviously it need not take precisely that form.

A brief look at some examples of transcendental arguments will reveal
the kinds of moves that are in question. We can find such propositions
as follows.

If experience of succession is to be possible, there must be something
that is invariant.
If experience of change is to be possible, the empirical world must
abide by causality.
If experience of items as distinct from me and from one another is
to be possible, they must be located in a unified spatio-temporal
world.
If self-awareness is to arise, I must recognize others as themselves
persons who (can) recognize me.

The moves in question can be represented by material implication; and if
those conditionals can be taken as true, the arguments in which they figure
would be valid. But that leaves open the question of how they are estab-
lished to be true. What kind of move could be involved here in each case,
such as would render these crucial propositions

synthetic

 and yet such that
their truth can be established a priori?
The suggestion I want to explore accepts that, within the confines of the
valid deductive argument, the propositions in question must be regarded as
assumed. These propositions cannot be established to be true as long as they
are considered simply as articulating conceptual relations or relations
between propositional contents (although what is established can be described

 at that level). Confinement to the grasp of the bare conceptual or
propositional content will capture what is being said, but not the a priori
ground for its being true. Securing the latter requires shifting from the
conceptual level to something like the phenomenological level, the level of
experience. Only so can the grounds for the truth of the transcendental
claim be grasped. At that level we stand to secure an a priori grasp of the
primary ampliative move, a move that the material implication at the
propositional level merely shadows.
But saying only that the central move must be understood phenomeno-
logically rather than conceptually will not further the discussion. It threat-
ens to be a mere return to a posteriori grounding. We need to be clear what
that descent from the merely conceptual level amounts to.

Part 4: Situated Thoughts.

The ampliative step involved is often gestured towards by talk of identifying
‘conditions of possibility’: it can be said that in the above schema

r

 is a condi-
tion of the possibility of

q

. But mere talk of conditions of possibility is too
vague. It could be taken to mean no more than semantic conditions for the
possibility of a given concept making sense, which would simply take us
back towards the notion of conceptual presupposition. We get closer to a
relevant notion, I think, in Allison’s talk of an

epistemic condition

 – a condi-
tion for the possibility of knowledge, or of experience. However, Allison
does not develop this notion in connection with a discussion of transcenden-
tal arguments, and does not say much about it: ‘Even though this notion is
central to Kant’s whole transcendental enterprise, the fact that he never
explicitly deals with it makes it difficult, if not impossible, to define in any
precise way.’

 Allison says that an epistemic condition is one ‘that is neces-
sary for the representation of an object or an objective state of affairs.’

 And
it is supposed to be distinct from a

psychological

 condition, and from an

ontological

 condition.

 The idea is that there is a set of epistemic conditions
of the possibility of human experience of things – the categories and the
forms of space and time constitute this set – and these conditions determine
the way in which any objectual experience we may have will be structured.
There is in fact a question about just how distinct epistemic conditions
can be from psychological conditions. Relative paucity of detail aside, what
Allison says in passing about epistemic conditions – e.g. that they are
‘conditions that determine what can count as an object for the human
mind’

 – seems consistent with (although it does not entail) the view that
they originate in a substantive body of cognitive structures essential to the
human mind. Merely insisting on the non-contingency of this cognitive
equipment would not help to distinguish epistemic from psychological
conditions. And it may be better to insist only that for something to count
as an epistemic condition it should be so construed as not to rest on any specific cognitive apparatus to which alternatives are comprehensible.
What we need then is to secure a handle on the notion of an epistemic
condition that does not draw its legitimacy from any particular doctrine of
cognitive or psychological structures.


To set out the relevant method of proof of the synthetic transitions in
question, and to understand better the notion of an epistemic condition, it
will help to introduce the notion of a

situated thought

. In saying of a thought
that it is

situated

, I mean that it is construed as being the thought that one
would have

from a particular point

 within a framework, the content of which
is informed by it being grasped as if from that perspective. It is not bare
propositional content considered as if from nowhere, but is rather informed
by being phenomenologically embedded and directed. In saying that what
is so situated is a

thought

, I mean to distinguish it from mere phenomeno-
logical or perceptual experience. It is distinguished in two ways that are
important here. The first is as follows. Any experience must be internally
structured, or articulated, on pain of it not qualifying as an experience at all:
without that articulation, sufficient to distinguish one type of experience
from another, there would not be anything it is like for the experiencing
subject to undergo it.

 But saying that experience must be articulated is not
the same as saying that it must be linguistically articulated, or indeed linguis-
tically articulable by the subject in question; it is not even to say that that
articulation is fully cognitive. Part of the point of talking of a situated

thought

 is precisely to focus on that articulation, and to make it cognitively
salient in a way that it might not be in a brute experience. Second, a situated

thought

 differs from the corresponding experience in that the situated
thought does not require that the subject actually be situated – only that he
approximates in thought to what would be delivered up to him if he were so
situated. We might put this by saying that the situated thought is phenome-
nologically informed without itself being a phenomenological experience.
In this respect the situated thought can be considered to fall between, on
the one hand, the bare propositional content and, on the other, an experi-
ence the content of which is expressed by that propositional articulation. It
falls short of actually being an

experience

; it is rather a matter of represent-
ing

in thought

 a situated construal of a propositional content: considering
what it would be like to be so situated as to have an experience of that
content. Importantly, establishing the validity of a transcendental proof
requires only that we have the situated thought, not that we actually have
an experience that instantiates the situated thought.

 For transcendental
proof it is enough that we make the move in thought from the purely
propositional articulation to phenomenological description; there is no
need for an actual descent to the level of situated experience.
Although this is a thin characterization of the notion of a situated thought,
I hope that enough has been said for it to be possible to put the notion to
work here. The idea is that while the bare propositional understanding of q will leave us forced to regard the ampliative transition, say from

q

 to

r

, as
something that can only be premised in the course of the argument, the
situated thought of the content expressed by

q

 would suffice to licence a priori
the ampliative move in question.

Part 5: An Example of Situated Thought.

It will help if we take an example of a situated thought. We can envisage a
subject situated in front of a tree in the garden, and being perceptually
related to it, sufficient to have the thought that there is a tree in the garden.
The bare propositional content of the thought is:

"There is a tree in the
garden"

. The situated thought involves appropriating in thought that
subject’s perspective onto the perceptual scene that corresponds to the bare
propositional content: thinking ourselves into what is involved for the
subject in his being positioned as he is in grasping the perceptual content.
The situated thought in this case allows the envisaged subject not only to
grasp that there is a tree in the garden, with all that that proposition implies
(e.g. that there is at least one tree in the world, etc.), but also to know
without any further observation that there is a tree

in front of me

, or that
there is a tree

between me and the horizon

.
The question is, what licenses this move from

There is a tree in the garden

(=

q

) to

There is a tree in front of me

 (=

r

)? It is clearly not a valid deductive
inference from one proposition to another. Moreover, even if my knowledge
of

q

 is based on perception, and that perception is my own, and I know that
it is, it still would not license me to infer from

q

 to

r

. I might, for example,
be in a laboratory vehicle, receiving pictures on a screen from a camera that
I know is in the garden, but not know that the vehicle I am in has also moved
into the garden, just below the operative camera. Now, what has been lost
in this latter scenario is precisely the situatedness of the thought that

q

. If
we restore that connection, so that the thought is grasped

from my point of
view and informed by it

, then the mere having of the thought licenses the
move to ‘There is a tree in front of me’. The move from the one proposition
to the other is synthetic: there is more in the thought that there is a tree in
front of me than there is in the thought that there is a tree in the garden. Yet
the move from the one to the other can be made a priori, in the sense that
no further observational input is required. What validates the move is some-
thing other than a conceptual relation between propositions. It is not the
content of the thought expressed by

q

, but what the situated thinker brings
to the thinking of it, that stands to carry that thinker from the truth of the
one thought to the truth of the other.

 (Here it is relevant that the situated-
ness of the thought

There is a tree in the garden

 cannot be incorporated as
part of the propositional content of the thought. I will return to this later.)
Now, this example seems trivial, and its simplicity helps to bring out
what is meant by talk of a thought being situated.

 But the connection between situated thought and transcendental proof is immediately brought
out by this further example: Take the content expressed by ‘MS does not
exist now’. As a mere thought content, unsituated, it is not very interesting.
It says merely that MS does not exist; and of course he may not. But as a
situated thought by MS, the thought may be informed by the fact that the
thinker himself is MS, that it is MS himself thinking it. So situated,
the otherwise innocuous proposition constitutes the

cogito

 proof. Indeed,
the

cogito

 seems to be a prime example of a proof that trades on situated
thought. Of course, the

cogito

 is more usually expressed in terms of the
first-person pronoun, say in the form ‘I do not exist.’ But the situatedness
of the thought is still in play: it is only to the thinker whose thought is
informed by the fact that he himself, at the moment of thought, is also the
subject of the thought, that the thought ‘I do not exist’ is presented as self-
refuting in a way that comprises the

cogito

 proof.


 The same goes for the
more usual form of the

cogito

, ‘I think, (therefore) I exist.’ If it is construed
merely as an argument from one proposition, the understanding of which
is unsituated, to another, we miss, or are at a loss to explain, the force of
the argument. What drives the proof, what licenses the ‘therefore’, is only
the situated thought, the act of thinking the first proposition, which brings
the thinker ineluctably to the conclusion, while he is so thinking, that he
must exist.
A central feature of situated thought, noted above, should be under-
lined here. A thought that is not situated may be considered as pure
propositional or conceptual content. The content may be considered as if
from no point of view. In a situated thought, that is not the case. In situ-
ated thought the content of the thought is informed by the way the
subject is epistemically positioned in relation to the facts that make the
bare proposition true. This means that the content of a situated thought is
not merely propositional. Thus in the examples above it is not the purely
propositional content
"There is a tree in the garden"

, but the cognition
generated by the actual or envisaged experience of the tree in the garden,
that is the situated thought; it is not the propositional content "I am think-
ing" , but the cognition generated by the actual or envisaged experience of
my thinking, that is the situated thought in question. This brings out the
sense in which situated thought forces a shift from the purely
propositional or semantic level to the level of pure phenomenological
description.
Now the claim here is that the link between the cogito and situated
thought is characteristic of transcendental proof: that central transcendental
arguments typically trade on situated thoughts to make good their synthetic
a priori claims. We have said that in most transcendental arguments there
will be at least one central proposition that shadows a synthetic move – the
idea is that the truth of that proposition can be established a priori as
required only if it is understood to involve situated thought.

Part 6: Two Case Studies: Kant on SUbstance and on Causality.

To take an example of a transcendental argument from Kant, let us consider
the central move in the First Analogy to be:
All change is merely the alteration of an abiding substance.17
When it is considered as a bare propositional content, it is difficult to see
why this should be a true statement. It sounds like a bit of metaphysical
dogma. It is certainly not analytic; and it is difficult to see how as a synthetic
claim there can be any corresponding fact in the world that empirically veri-
fies or refutes it even a posteriori. The recognition of its a priori truth arises
only when the sentence is taken to be expressive of a situated thought.18
To see this – and also to see how close situated thought is to transcendental
insight – we can go back to the seemingly more trivial example of the two
already mentioned. The envisaged experience of that tree can be embel-
lished. The tree is struck by lightning and goes up in a sudden cloud of smoke.
To have, as a situated thought, the content
"There was a tree in the garden,
and now there is not a tree in the garden" , rather than merely entertaining
the corresponding propositional content, is to have or envisage having the
experience of me not encountering a tree now, where earlier I did. But for
that situated thought to make sense, it would have to be thought that there
is, throughout, something in front of me, a perceptual backdrop, such that
the demise of the tree is an event, an alteration, of that underlying substrate.
As Kant puts it: ‘A coming to be or ceasing to be that is not simply a deter-
mination of the permanent but is absolute, can never be a possible percep-
tion.’19 For the change between there being a tree in the garden at t1 and
there being no tree in the garden at t2 to be given within the confines of one
situated thought, there must be presupposed, within the domain that the
thought encompasses, an abiding spatio-temporal world. Moreover, since
bare space and time cannot themselves be experienced, there would have to
be something that fills the spatio-temporal region of experience: i.e. some-
thing that persists across the tree-related experiences, sufficient to afford
unity to the situated thought.
Now, whether the non sequitur attributed to Kant here can be made
good20 need not be of concern in the present context. Regardless of whether
we can move to the conclusion that there must be one abiding substance
underlying all change, the point here is the more modest conclusion that
there must be something abiding across any one change – that if there
weren’t, the perception of change would not be possible. That move – from
things change to there must be some object that is invariant underlying such
a change – is central to the argument, and the a priori truth of it can be
brought out by taking up the assertion ‘things change’ in the context of a
situated thought: by considering how things are for the situated subject experiencing the change. It is the situated understanding of the thought that
brings out the truth of what is implied a priori by it. Nothing else can bring
it out; but more importantly, nothing else is needed to bring it out – and this
even though the move in question is not analytic but rather is informative
about how the world must hold together in our experience of it.
An objection should be raised at this point. Why could the change in
question not be perceived without there being anything in the external
world underlying, and so perceptually bridging, the gap between the situ-
ated thought contents, of what there is in the garden at t1 and at t2? It may
be granted that to be able to calibrate the two there must be something that
remains unchanged, but why should it be specifically something external?
Now, if we accept the Kantian view that subjective apprehension is always
successive and atomistic, then arguably the only thing that can make the two
perceptions commensurable, is if they are perceived  as so many alterations
of a single underlying external world. (Without that, we could not even
make sense of the two situated thoughts belonging to a single subject.) But
that would count against the present attempt to construe transcendental
arguments in terms of situated thought. The point of this construal is that
the validity of transcendental arguments should be established a priori just
from the situatedness of the relevant thoughts, without any dependence on
the psychological make-up of the thinker. Insisting on experience being
successive and atomistic would precisely be to introduce commitment to a
form of transcendental or empirical psychology. Moreover, it is not as if
there are no psychological models that reject one or both of those concep-
tions.
There are several possible lines of response to this objection. The most
obvious response would be to grant the objection, but argue that it does not
count against the understanding of transcendental arguments in terms of
situated thoughts: that on the contrary, it shows only that Kant’s argument
in the First Analogy is not a very good transcendental argument, precisely
because it seems to turn centrally on more than pure situated thought.
Alternatively, it might be thought that Kant has saddled what would be a
valid proof with a substantive model of the mind. There would then be
several ways of prising the argument and the psychological model apart, and
one is particularly relevant in the present context.
Without going into background detail, it is enough for present purposes
to note that the argument can be freed from reliance on that psychological
model to the extent that the change in question is not construed as possibly
being a change merely between mental states, but rather is confined to a
change in perceptions purportedly of external objects, such that not only the
subjective experiences but also the apprehended states of affairs are them-
selves supposed to be temporally structured.21 For these latter to be
presented as changing in relation to one another, or as abiding, there must
also be an abiding external world on the backdrop of which it makes sense to say either that where one object was there is now another, or that where
one object was there is still the same object. That is, the only way for a subject
to be so situated with regard to the tree and the puff of smoke as to make
sense of there being an objective change from the one to the other, is if the
subject is also confronted with a single background world that remains
constant throughout the change. For an experience to represent its objects,
say, the disappearance of the tree and the appearance of a puff of smoke, as
standing in objective relations, those objects must be construed as modifica-
tions of that abiding world. And this follows regardless of whether our expe-
rience is always atomistic and successive, or is given whole as an organically
unified stream. In the latter case there may be no need to appeal to an abid-
ing external world to explain the unity of consciousness, and the two expe-
riences – as of a tree and of a cloud of smoke – would be related to one
another by virtue of being the contents of a unified subjective order. But
objectually construed, those contents – tree and smoke – would stand to be
incommensurable: like the contents of distinct dreams, discretely anchored,
that could not be coherently plotted in relation to one another (although the
occurrence of the dreams themselves arguably could). For a thinker to be
situated with regard to both object domains together so as to make sense of
there being relations between their denizens, even if only of temporal
succession, there would have to be a common world in which the two objec-
tual contents made their appearance.
The idea then, in response to the objection raised, is that while there
might be a construal of the argument that turns on a particular psychological
theory, and to that extent fails to offer a fully transcendental proof, the
specific line of argument presented here does not suffer that restriction, and
turns only on the a priori presuppositions of situated thought.
I turn now to a second example of a transcendental argument, also drawn
from Kant. The central proposition of the Second Analogy, on one
construal of it, is that everything that happens (= every event) has its cause.
Again, as a mere proposition it looks like a piece of metaphysics. And Kant
is clear that no one can acquire insight into that proposition merely from
attending to the concepts involved, and yet that it is known ‘with complete
apodictic certainty’. We can again understand what Kant means, by
regarding the intended transcendental proof as a matter of discovering the
presuppositions of having the situated thought that underpins the central
proposition. We need to ask, on this construal, what is involved in someone
actually having the experience of something as being an event. It seems
clear that where my perception is as of an event, rather than as of two co-
existing states of affairs, there the order of the perceptions involved is irre-
versible. That irreversibility is the mark of event-perception. The question
then is, what in my experience secures that irreversibility? What in the
circumstances of my experience could render two perceptions such that they
could not have occurred in reverse order? And Kant thinks that the subject would be faced with irreversibility of the two perceptions only if the
perceived states of affairs involved in them were put together in such a way
that the one state could not have happened except consequent upon the
other. We might put the relevant point by saying say that it is only thus that
the subject can, internal to the resources given to him in experience, establish
the objectual states of affairs involved as themselves being in succession,
and hence explain the irreversibility of his perceptions of them. But that is
just to affirm a law-governed order (which constitutes a form of causality for
Kant) holding within the objectual domain wherever we are entitled to talk
of experiencing events.
It is important to note that the conclusion of the argument is not simply
that we must have a belief in a causal order, but that such belief must be true
to the facts, in this sense: the empirical world of which we have experience
must be causally governed. Saying that the experienced world must be caus-
ally governed does not mean that our knowledge that it is so governed is
part of what is given as the content of our perceptual experience. The
content of our perceptual experience of the world clearly may be insuffi-
cient to establish that it is causally ordered (for all the Humean reasons that
Kant was responding to). What the Kantian argument purports to show is
that there is another route to establishing that the world we experience must
be causally ordered. Our belief in the causal ordering of the world will
necessarily correspond to the facts about the world we experience – since
those causal facts are required for experience to have the structure it does
have – even if those facts cannot be read off directly from the content of our
perceptual experience of that world. The importance of this, in the present
context, is in bringing out that the deliverances of situated thoughts are not
confined to the phenomenologically given contents of perceptual states, but
rather can extend to non-perceptual descriptions of how the world, in our
experience of it, must hang together.24
This construal of the Second Analogy helps to bring out the sense in
which it can be said that a situated understanding of the implication
expressed by the proposition "Everything that happens (every event) has its
cause"  provides the grounds for the truth of the proposition itself. Consider-
ing what is required for us to be so situated as to have the experience of irre-
versible perceptual states of an object world, and hence of the occurrence of
events in it, reveals that the states of affairs involved must themselves be
governed by causal laws.
The general claim here is that as in these cases, of the First and Second
Analogies, so in other central transcendental arguments there will be at
least one proposition the appropriate understanding of which – and estab-
lishing the truth of which – involves situated thought. This is what might be
put by saying that the crucial synthetic moves involved in transcendental
arguments stand to be established a priori only by the relation of the prop-
ositional content to possible experience.

Part 7: Reflections.

With this approach to transcendental arguments in place, some important
features of these arguments stand to be explained.
First, the construal of central moves as situated thoughts casts some light
on the question of whether the transcendental proofs in which those moves
play a part are formal deductive inferences. Something was said about this
earlier in anticipation, but it is worth returning to it now. There was a lively
discussion surrounding the question of the formal validity of transcendental
arguments several years ago, but it trailed off before any clear conclusion
was reached.26 The treatment here implies that construing these arguments
as formally valid inferences cannot be adequate. Formal deductive argu-
ments range over, and turn on, relations between propositions or sentences.
But the content of a situated thought cannot be fully captured as proposi-
tional content: the content as delivered by the situatedness of the thinker
essentially extends beyond anything that the mere propositional construal
of the content can deliver. Because of this, although the over-all form of a
transcendental argument might seem to be of a deductively valid argument
(e.g. extended modus ponens), when it comes to the central individual
moves of the argument the notion of presupposition or necessary condition
involved cannot be brought into play as long as we attend only to conceptual
or propositional contents. It is precisely in consequence of acknowledging
this that we have secured the relevant notion of a necessary condition – or
an epistemic condition – that does allow those moves to be made a priori. If
the notion of ‘argument’ is readily taken to stand for relations between
propositions or sentences (ideally such relations as constitute valid deduc-
tive forms), then it might be better to avoid confusion by talking primarily
of transcendental proofs rather than transcendental arguments. Transcen-
dental proofs are (or stand to be) valid a priori, but the necessary conditions
that their crucial moves advert to are not between propositions or concepts,
but between situated thought contents.
We can put it this way: the over-all proof in which those situated thoughts
feature as the grounds for the central moves can be articulated as a deduc-
tive inference, but only to the extent that those central ampliative moves are
taken as premised in the course of the argument, it being acknowledged that
they need to be separately established by way of transcendental proof,
which requires departing from the purely propositional level of understand-
ing to situated thought. As valid deductive inferences transcendental argu-
ments are then parasitic on transcendental proofs, at least if they are to
retain any epistemological interest.
It is interesting to note in this context that Kant himself does not usually
speak of transcendental arguments, but of transcendental proofs. We
should perhaps not read that much into this terminological fact; neverthe-
less, in speaking of transcendental proof, Kant says things that readily suggest the difference captured here in terms of the distinction between
propositional/conceptual contents and situated thoughts, here is citation.
In transcendental knowledge, so long as we are concerned only with
concepts of the understanding, our guide is the possibility of experience.
Such proof does not show that the given concept (for instance, of that
which happens) leads directly to another concept (that of a cause); for
such a transition would be a saltus which could not be justified. The proof
proceeds by showing that experience itself, and therefore the objects
of experience, would be impossible without a connection of this kind.
Accordingly, the proof must also at the same time show the possibility
of arriving synthetically and a priori at some knowledge of things which
was not contained in the concepts of them.
Understanding transcendental proofs in terms of the necessary conditions
of situated thoughts not only serves to set such proofs aside from others, but
also explains why what makes them unique precisely fits them to be called
transcendental proofs, in Kant’s specific use of the term: as identifying that
which is presuppositional to experience. In dealing with the conditions of
having situated thought, such proofs precisely investigate how things must
be held together for experience to be possible. It is because of this that tran-
scendental proofs will always start from the basic situatedness of thought:
from the fact that I have experience, or that all my experiences are mine.
This makes it clear that it is not that there are transcendental arguments,
and that the interesting ones will start from some premiss that the sceptic
cannot doubt, such as that we have experience. It is rather in the very nature
of anything properly called a transcendental argument or proof that it must
have such a premiss. That it might thereby answer the sceptic is more or less
a fortunate by-product.
A second feature, connected to this, relates to the status of these condi-
tions. To take the example of the argument for permanence drawn from the
First Analogy, an abiding world might be sufficient, but what renders it also
necessary for the experience of objective change or, more generally, of
temporal relations in the object-world? How do we establish that no other
way of securing such experiences is possible? There is a very general sense
in which we cannot rule out alternatives – the sense in which God could
make anything work differently. But since that is seemingly true of basic
mathematical truths and laws of logic too, that restriction on necessity claims
need not be of special concern here. Leaving aside that general sense in
which nothing can be claimed to be absolutely necessary, the point is that
the link established a priori here, between a situated thought and its
epistemic conditions, is so direct that we cannot even begin to identify, or conceive of there being, any mediating mechanism which might be displaced
(in other times or places). The connections in question seem to be necessary
precisely because they are immediate – there is no logical space into which
a wedge might be driven, suggesting where modification might occur such
as would sustain alternative ways of making possible the situated thoughts
in question. The thing that conceals that direct link, making it seem that one
could be had without the other, is that rather than a situated understanding
of the thoughts in question the matter is considered at the purely proposi-
tional level – at which level there is clearly room for doubt. Given that the
necessity here is not psychological or metaphysical, and given how direct it
is, we might – if only as a way of flagging a point for further work – think of
it as a sui generis necessity: the necessity of certain conditions obtaining for
situated thought to be possible at all. As such it may suitably be called
transcendental necessity, where ‘transcendental’ means precisely being
presuppositional to situated thought, or to experience.
A third feature worth noting is that we have here, in the construal of tran-
scendental arguments in terms of situated thought, an approach to the link
between transcendental arguments and transcendental idealism. Consider
the following passage, from the First Analogy.

we ought first to have proved that in all appearances there is some-
thing permanent, and that the transitory is nothing but determination
of its existence. But such a proof cannot be developed dogmatically,
that is, from concepts, since it concerns a synthetic apriori proposition.
Yet as it never occurred to anyone that such propositions are valid
only in relation to possible experience, and can therefore be proved
only through a deduction of the possibility of experience,29 we need not
be surprised that though the above principle is always postulated as
lying at the basis of experience (for in empirical knowledge the need
of it is felt,) it has never itself been proved.

Kant’s purpose in talking of the propositions in question being valid only in
relation to possible experience is, of course, primarily to indicate his strat-
egy of curtailing the remit of metaphysical claims in order to be able finally
to establish their a priori validity. But in the present context this talk of
propositions that are valid only in relation to possible experience, and which
can be proved only through a deduction of the possibility of experience, is
again immediately suggestive of the more minimal claim: that the crucial
move in the argument can be made good only in relation to situated thought
(= possible experience), rather than in terms of bare propositional thought.
That a passage, the primary concern of which is to articulate the transcen-
dental idealist setting of the argument, is found amenable to such a
construal is, I think, indicative of the fact that something about the notion of situated thought is expressive of an insight in transcendental idealism.
And it is an insight that may be retained without the rest of that position.
The underlying connection can be brought out, even without reaching for
any transcendental distinctions, by clarifying the way in which the situated-
ness of thought is both a necessary and a sufficient condition of transcen-
dental proof. If what has been said here is right, then if – per impossibile – a
person’s thought could not in any respect be construed by that person as
situated, then the conclusions of transcendental proofs would not be avail-
able to that person for, specifically a priori, knowledge. We are to think here
of a person whose point of view would be so detached that all of his thoughts
were like that in the case of the person observing the garden on a monitor,
not knowing where he himself is situated vis-à-vis the camera. But what is
both necessary and sufficient for a transcendental proof to work is only that
the subject’s thought be situated virtually: that is, that it be situated with
regard to an objectual domain, the order of which may be experienced as
holding independently of our subjective states of awareness of it, regardless
of whether the entire situation is in itself as it is internally presented to the
thinker. Within the context in which the subject finds himself embedded, at
least virtually, certain things will be known a priori to obtain (known by any
person whose thought is so situated). This raises the possibility of a thought
being situated, while the thinker can consider that he, or the subject with
whom he is identifying, might not in fact be situated as he takes himself to
be. In that case we have the domain within which the thought is situated
giving rise to transcendental proofs, while allowing that those proofs are
valid only within, and of, the context of such situated thought. Here the
domain within which situated thought is embedded parallels Kant’s empiri-
cal reality; while the recognition that the a priori validity of our transcen-
dental proofs is restricted to such domains parallels Kant’s transcendental
idealism. In a nutshell, the connection with transcendental idealism lies in
this: in the domain of situated thought, or of experience, the necessity of
making the move in question is established, and it holds true of any such
context, regardless of whether it holds true of, or indeed it makes sense to
talk of there being, any domain that extends beyond it.
Finally, a comment on the difference between talking of conditions of
situated thought and talking simply of conditions of experience. As was
noted above, the device of situated thought serves to focus attention on the
relevant dimension of experience, to render its articulation cognitive. But
there is more to it than that: it is the way in which situated thought presents
the cognitive articulation of experience that matters. If we speak of condi-
tions of experience without any further qualification, then we should expect
the conclusions of transcendental arguments to apply not only to human
forms of such experience, but to all. Kant sensibly does not advocate
anything like this: he thinks that God’s experience, for example, would not
be subject to the epistemic conditions that apply to us. His only explanation for this is that we have faculties of the mind that would not be shared by all
other forms of experience. This relieves transcendental arguments from the
uncomfortable burden of having to legislate for all possible forms of expe-
rience. But it has the cost of relying on rather dubious transcendental
psychology. It also draws the relevant line in the wrong place, since not only
God but also other forms of experience (such as that had by non-human
animals) then stand to be excluded from the jurisdiction of transcendental
arguments. Unpacking transcendental arguments in terms of the device of
situated thought has the advantage of drawing the line in the right place, for
the right reason, and without being committed to transcendental psychology
as a means of doing it. What is identified is that, for all we have seen, these
are the conditions of any experience that is articulated from the perspective
of an embedded subject. That includes more than human experience,
obviously, and excludes God’s experience, which is precisely not situated, or
from a point of view. The link between transcendental arguments and points
of view (perspectives) has long been appreciated. The suggestion here is
that it is not that our point of view is tainted by a particular cognitive struc-
ture that we bring with us, but that it is the notion of a situated thought, the
mere notion of experience as being from a point of view, that itself imposes
the relevant structure.

Part 8: Conclusion.

A point of historical diagnosis might be worth bringing out at this point. The
concern with transcendental arguments has been widespread since Kant,
and as much in analytical circles as in non-analytic philosophy. But there is
one relevant difference we are now in a position to identify clearly. I said
earlier that a standard construal of transcendental arguments in terms of
conceptual or propositional presupposition missed a crucial feature of such
arguments. That construal has been particularly rife in analytic philosophy.
In contrast, the refusal of the linguistic ascent, in favour of a descent into the
phenomena, is more readily associated with a non-analytic approach to
transcendental proofs.
Specifically, the form of proof identified, in asking after the preconditions
of what I have been calling situated thought, approximates to what may
deservedly be referred to as transcendental or pure phenomenology. If what
has been said here is right, then we have an insight into how such a pure
phenomenology is of epistemic – and not merely descriptive – import; and
how it helps to capture both the nature of Kant’s transcendental proofs and
the confinement of their validity to empirical reality, to the level of possible
experience.
The best way forward, as I hope should be clear from the above, is a
combination of the two approaches. We should set out the formally valid
deductive arguments as the shell, while recognizing that the central moves, which can be regarded only as premised in the run of the argument, need to
be established independently, by way of transcendental proof – working
through the relevant propositional content in situated thought. If that is
done, the status of propositions that are synthetic but a priori stands to be
established (and their scope appropriately restricted).
